yeah well I don't think any experiments
have been done yet on
like family
experience of collective family
experience of psychedelic transformation
for example
um we haven't got that far in the
scientific analysis of such things it's
worth attempting to do that because I
think that that would again be a
significant step toward creating this
new this new paradigm around death you
know that uh medicine that's a big
deficit of medicine you know this idea
that uh
death can be death is inevitable but
death doesn't have to be terrible
[Music]
hello everyone uh thank you for tuning
in and watching and listening I'm very
pleased today to have with me Dr Dennis
McKenna
he's an American ethno pharmacologist
lecturer and author he is a founding
board member and director of
ethnopharmacology at hefter Research
Institute a non-profit organization
dedicated to the use and exploration of
psychedelic medicines
Dr McKenna received his PhD from the
University of British Columbia and
worked as a postdoc
at the National Institute of Mental
Health and at Stanford
he is the brother of Terence McKenna who
believed that the human relationship
with psychedelic plants played a major
role in our cognitive and social
Evolution it was a very well-known
figure to denizens of the modern
psychedelic movement
Dr McKinnon and I first met some years
ago 2016 in Toronto at a conference
hosted by mind matters at the University
of Toronto where we shared our views on
the significance the potential
significance of Altered States Of
Consciousness it's really good to see
you again Dennis thanks very much for
agreeing to do this podcast
thank you so much Dr Peterson uh it's a
pleasure to be invited I'm very happy to
be here it's nice to see you again after
eight years
so neither you nor I were famous at that
time now you're quite famous and I'm a
little more well known
so time passes yeah well it's very it's
very good to see you so tell me tell me
what you're up to recently as you said
we haven't spoken for a number of years
so what are you busy doing now well
basically uh so I immigrated to Canada
in 2019
and I left Academia I left the
University of Minnesota immigrated up
here with my wife and uh I started a
non-profit called the McKenna Academy
for natural philosophy
and originally it was incorporated here
in Canada but then we we
dissolved that and Incorporated in the
States because it made more sense and
the McKenna Academy for natural
philosophy is uh basically devoted to
education
as you can tell by the name primarily
about psychedelics and plant medicines
uh originally are
our vision for it was to do Retreats and
conferences and that sort of thing
but in 2020 coven came along and kind of
put a spike in that so we the last
actual physical conference we did before
covid was uh was in 2019 in South
America we did a mystery School retreat
with my friend uh Alexandra tanu who is
a ethno musicologist there's that ethno
term again and then we did a lot of
online events we did a we offered a
six-week-long ethyl botany course in
collaboration with the organization for
tropical studies uh in this year we did
our first physical conference since
Coven in the UK that was called
espd 55.
which is espd stands for the ethno
pharmacologic search for psychoactive
drugs and uh 55 is it was the 55th
anniversary of the original conference
which was uh sponsored by the National
Institute of Mental Health in 1967.
and I actually did an espd50 in 2017
but that was before the McKenna Academy
was formed so so we did these two and
people could look at uh espd55.com
it's open access and see what we talked
about it was very well received it was
at this uh beautiful venue in in
Yorkshire uh and endorsant I guess it
was and it was very well received and we
had 37 speakers covering a whole range
of topics related to this
General topic of the Etho pharmacologic
search for psychoactive drugs so that's
that's what I've been doing Jordan
basically working through the academy
and and doing that sort of thing
[Music]
government continues to spend borrowed
money inflation continues to swell
dragging down our economy and the stock
market has entered bear territory so
what's your plan are your assets
Diversified I'm Phillip Patrick precious
metal specialist for the Birch gold
group for nearly 20 years we've helped
Americans diversify into gold and we can
help you too did you know you can own
physical gold and silver in a tax
sheltered account we can help you
transfer an IRA or 401K tied to stocks
into an IRA in Gold if you're skeptical
about the trajectory of the economy in
the US dollar then text Jordan to 989898
Birch gold group will send you a free
info kit on securing your savings with
gold with thousands of satisfied
customers five star reviews and an A
plus rating with the Better Business
Bureau we take Precious Metals seriously
text Jordan to
989898 for your free info kit
maybe we could let everybody watching
and listening know a little bit more
about what ethnobotany is exactly sure
so could you could you elaborate on that
sure well
ethnopharmacology is so I like to term
it so if no pharmacology has a
kind of formal definition if you want to
get down on the weeds with it but I kind
of like the formal definition for a
couple of reasons death though
pharmacology is the interdisciplinary
scientific investigation a biologically
active substances used or observed by
humans in traditional societies
so it's a kind of a
you might say tortured definition but
there's a reason for that
for one thing it's not its study is not
confined to plants
it includes fungi and any anything that
may have biologically active substances
it's not necessarily about medicines for
example Aero poisons are certainly
within the purview of the study of
ethnophobicology or any kind of
biologically active substances fish
poisons this kind of thing would be
subjects for ethyl pharmacology but
usually it's medicinal plants
and not necessarily psychoactive and uh
and it also it's important to note that
this is really about
indigenous societies not not
you know what we call developed
societies developed Nations or whatever
because if it was under that definition
everything would be ethnopharmacology
the two terms ethno is people and
pharmacology is pharmacology the study
of drugs and their actions but so this
sort of uh
you know elaborate definition kind of
ticks all the boxes if you will it's
interdisciplinary it's biologically
active substances it's uh it's
indigenous use of of these things and
Indigenous people as as we know are very
ingenious about discovering these things
in the in the biome and utilizing them
for medicines or poisons food or
whatever right so you're you're one of a
number of researchers who's going out to
um let's say pre-scientific
uh locales or peoples and finding out
what they know traditionally before
their culture is lost so that we can
pull that knowledge into the broader
scientific domain and and Associate it
with what we already know and also
preserve it and hopefully extend it if
if we're fortunate that's exactly right
that's exactly right and much of what
the McKenna Academy does and and that
we're about is
collecting and preserving this knowledge
you know this indigenous knowledge that
is uh in danger of being lost that's
rapidly being lost due to all sorts of
factors you know the the decimation of
cultural Traditions there are lots of
habitat the loss of species climate
change all of these things are leading
to the uh disappearance of this
knowledge
and yet there is still a lot left to be
known so so the McKenna Academy is
trying to make a bridge between
traditional knowledge preserve it and uh
and scientific investigation science is
the Nexus that brings these things
together
and we have
you know we we have done various
seminars about this like espd50 we
currently have a big project going in
Peru uh for which we're seeking support
which is to uh the the uh University in
aquitos Peru unap I've worked with the
uh the the scientists there for over 50
years
and there's one person there that I've
worked with since we were both graduate
students and I first came to Peru in
1981 to do my graduate work I met this
gentleman
who was a also a student at the time
and we have worked together over 50
years on various projects he's now the
curator of the herbarium at uh at udap
at this University there are burial
evidence
and we have a project going to digitize
this herbarium and put it all online and
make that a resource for
scientific researchers or anyone with an
interest in the Amazonian Flora this
will be a tremendous uh repository of
information about the plants
you know that have been collected and
deposited this or in this herbarium over
uh really uh for about 40 or 50 years
it's it's it really was established
around
1970. I didn't get to Peru until
1981. but uh that's a big project that
we're that we're that's our main focus
now that uh espd50 is or espd55 is more
or less behind us we're working on this
other more ambitious project
now you you spent some time
um studying Ayahuasca yes and that's
kind of an interesting story so maybe
you could tell everybody who's watching
and listening how Ayahuasca is prepared
and also how unlikely it was that that
preparation method was discovered and
I'd like to know if you have any more
insight into how in the world that ever
came about
yes yes
yes to both I so I did my PhD research
uh at the University of British Columbia
was basically about Ayahuasca about
looking at the chemistry pharmacology
Botanical sources traditional uses of
Ayahuasca uh another aspect of my thesis
research was kind of a comparison of
Ayahuasca with another
much more obscure episodian uh
psychedelic uh called ukuhe
uh which is
comes from an entirely different
Botanical sources
but like Ayahuasca it is also an orally
active form of
dimethyltryptamine and that's the key to
this DMT
is a short-acting psychedelic but it's
not
uh orally active by itself if you
consume DMT if you drink a tea that
contains DMT or you know just eat DMT or
whatever
it's not active because there are
enzymes in the gut monoamine oxidases
that will inactivate DMT
before it's ever absorbed in the active
form what indigenous people have done
when they prepare Ayahuasca they combine
it with another plant that contains
monoamine oxidase Inhibitors this class
of compounds called beta carbolines very
potent very selective MAO inhibitors so
if you make a a beverage a drink or
decoction is really the technical term
with a plant that contains DMT and a
plant that contains these beta
carbonates then it becomes orally active
and instead of a 10 to 20 minute
experience which is what you get when
you smoke DMT or vape DMT they do that
now these days or inject it even you get
about 20 to 30 minutes
of an experience but in the oral form it
stretches it out to six or seven hours
so it's a very different experience it's
not as intense
but in some way it's deeper it's more
profound because the thing with taking
DMT by a parental route other than
through the gut
it is profound it's very intense it's
also so fast
that by the time you're
uh you know by the time you're just
beginning to sort of get to the place
that's already fading you know so you
come back with not a lot of information
that kind of a sense of astonishment but
not a lot of hard data so the idea of
Ayahuasca is you get to spend more time
in that place in that altered state and
there's a chance to learn more now how
did this come about the question always
comes up how did these indigenous people
figure out this combination one plant
containing beta carbolines and another
containing DMT out of the 80 000 or so
species in the Amazon how did they
stumble on
this one combination was a trial and
error
or how if you talk to the people
they will say well the plants told us
you know but to a western scientist this
doesn't make a lot of sense you know the
plants the plants told you what are you
talking about you know
actually I think the real story is a
little more uh prosaic in a sense that
in uh in our uh
espd50 conference we had a
anthropologist Dr Manolo Torres who
presented on this and uh
the fact is that
at a certain point
uh maybe a thousand years ago possibly a
little earlier than that there was a
very active there were different
cultures that were living
sort of in proximity to each other in
the region where Colombia Venezuela and
Peru now come together these cultures
were very uh experimentally oriented
toward plants they had shamanic
traditions and uh they used uh they were
also very active in making chicha they
were essentially beer producers they
distilled or they didn't distill them
but they had different fermented
beverages prepared for fruits and Grains
and things like that and
they had many different kind of teachers
mostly prepared from manioc and they
were also experimentalists they were
like
they were like uh craft Brewers today
sort of you know craft Brewers will they
have their beer but then they'll just
reach for anything on the shelf or an
ingredient will come up and they'll say
oh let's make it let's make a craft brew
with uh with cave in it or with some
other some other plant let's make
something interesting well the the
people making the the Chicho had the
same sort of curiosity and in in their
medicinal pharmacopoeia they had the
snuffs right that's the other way in the
Amazon that the DMT is used in the form
of stuff and they had these snuffs they
had these edited anthra stuffs which are
don't require mbal Inhibitors because
you take them you know as a snuff they
also had better stereopsis which is the
vine that contains uh the beta
carbolines they use that separately as a
medicinal plant for various reasons and
it it has some psychoactivity basically
I think they stumbled on this
formulation
you know the the plants were in the mix
as it were and they stumbled on this
formulation but it wasn't wasn't
entirely uh
trial and error you know it was it was
more like an educated guess
not really from the standpoint of
biochemistry they didn't think in terms
of monoamine oxidase inhibition and that
sort of thing but they were familiar
with the effects of these different
plants and they thought well what
happens if we mix them
you know and they did
they had a spectacular result
designed for anyone to sell anywhere
Shopify gives entrepreneurs the
resources once reserved for big
businesses an all-in-one e-commerce
platform Shopify makes it simple to sell
to anyone from anywhere whether you're
selling succulents or stilettos start
selling with Shopify and join the
platform simplifying Commerce for
millions of businesses worldwide with
Shopify you'll customize your online
store to your brand discover new
customers and build the relationships
that will keep them coming back Shopify
covers all the sales channels to
successfully grow your business from an
in-person POS system to an all-in-one
e-commerce platform even across social
media platforms like Tick Tock Facebook
and Instagram thanks to 24 7 support and
free on-demand business courses Shopify
is here to help you succeed every step
of the way it's how every minute new
sellers around the world make their
first sale with Shopify and you can too
go to shopify.com jbp for a free 14-day
trial and get get full access to
shopify's entire Suite of features start
selling on Shopify today go to
shopify.com jbp right now that's
shopify.com jbp
I was talking to Brian Murray rescue I
think it's probably yeah more than a
year ago he wrote the immortality key
and you know he he was although a lawyer
he was the book is about ethno
pharmacology in many regards and it
sounds to me like the account that
you're making of what happened in the
Amazon jungle sounds to me very much
like what seemed to happen in ancient
Greek culture with their formulation of
various psychedelic wines that's right
so all these different people were just
brewing all these different concoctions
and experimenting to see what produced
the most uh remarkable effect and and in
Greece they seem to have stumbled across
something that was perhaps LSD based or
essentially LSD based whereas in the
Amazon jungle they they came across both
DMT and the and the chemical that
inhibited its breakdown
and so that's it's very interesting to
see that that is likely the case in both
those disparate cultures right
well Shamanism which is what we're
talking about here
uh shamans are experimentalists you know
and and many of our
even most important medicines again we
can point to aeropoisons I mentioned
aeropoisons before
and arrow poisons are not regarded as
medicines in in the in the context in
which they're used you know they're
they're used as poisons for hunting on
the other hand the ingredients in Arrow
poisons do have medicinal properties
that have been recognized in the 20th
century and they're they're important
they're important medicines for uh for
muscular surgery and this sort of thing
there there they block the neuromuscular
Junction and the reason I mention
aeropoisons is that that's another
example of people
do what I like to characterize is
mucking around with plants you know
throw things together and see what
happens you know and that's true of the
psychoactive plants and these different
chicha uh uh formulations that they have
or the arrow poisons which are not just
one ingredient they're complex mixtures
of many kinds of psychoact or or you
know more or less toxic plants so
it was curiosity driven you know the the
people immersed in this Amazonian biome
this this this chemical ecology if you
will
uh of of complex secondary plant
products and and driven by curiosity you
know what happens if we take plant a and
plant B and combine them or plant a b c
and d and mix them all together and what
go what happens
so in that sense their approach is very
scientific you know because science
really Discovery is driven by curiosity
these folks were curious they didn't
keep notes they didn't write lab reports
you know what what knowledge that they
had they transmitted through the culture
through oral traditions and as as this
knowledge became you know more widely
disseminated
other groups began to
also take the core knowledge but then
expand on it because they had species
you know in their biomes that maybe not
were originally around and that's the
way uh that's the way I think folk
knowledge works it's it's a uh it's an
evolutionary process it's a process of
sharing information
and accumulating this knowledge that
then is uh you know transmitted through
oral traditions and and through
migrations and this sort of thing so
it's it's not formal science but
sort of the impulse that leads to this
is Curiosity Discovery and that is at
the core of Science in my opinion so I
was I I gotta I want to tie a couple of
things together here I I recently talked
with a Dr Carl friston who works at
University College in London and he's
formulated a theory of cognitive
function that's very influential or
elaborated the theory of cognitive
function that's very influential and I
want to run it by you because I think
it's relevant to well it's definitely
relevant perhaps to your interests in uh
in in the effects of psychedelics so
Tristan and other observers have posited
that we we look at the world through a
hierarchy of Concepts and that this is
necessary and that AI systems do exactly
do the same thing
um and that that the nested the
hierarchically nested Concepts range
from those that are trivial that you
would just use in a throwaway manner
let's say maybe your opinion about what
you're going to do in the next 10
minutes might fall into that category
to those that are uh
that are the profound axioms upon which
you predicate your life so for example
if you're married one of your axiomatic
conceptions or or presumptions or even
perceptions might be the faithfulness of
your partner and the willingness of that
person and you to continue to engage in
your long-term uh relationship
and then you so then imagine a hierarchy
of presumption such that some
presumptions are much more fundamental
than others or in other words
upon some presumptions many other
presumptions depend
and then for some other presumptions
there like I said they're just
the moment the the opinion of the moment
and easily replaceable now then imagine
that there's a gradient of information
processing
so that
some neurological mechanisms process the
relatively trivial conceptions and
others process the more profound and
deeper presumptions
and then imagine that's laid across the
hemisphere so that the left hemisphere
more or less deals with the particulars
and the right hemisphere deals with the
more fundamental presumptions
and then imagine further and and this
has been reasonably well documented now
that variants of Serotonin affect
different levels of that hierarchy of
conception
so that the serotonergic systems that
are affected by psychedelics in fact the
Deep presumptions
and the serotonin mechanisms that are
affected by antidepressants stabilize
the entire structure
and so what friston's work along with
Carhartt Harris is indicating there was
others working on this as well that
psychedelics
induce entropy into
the conceptual hierarchy at the most
fundamental level
and so and maybe that's associated the
the hemispheric specialization element
is something that I added to that
net set of presuppositions partly
because of Investigations I've done into
hemispheric specialization but also
because of the work of Ian mcgilchrist
who's been positing such things and so
it looks like the psychedelics
effect systems that are naturally
affected by high levels of stress
because when you're extremely stressed
maybe that's a time to revisit some of
your fundamental presumptions because
something has gone wrong in your life so
that you're fundamentally stressed and
so in some sense what the psychedelics
seem to do is mimic the process of
revolutionary cognitive adaptation
okay so that's only half the question
but then then I have another question
though and that all strikes me as highly
plausible except for one thing and this
is a stumbling block for me and maybe
you can shed some light on it I know
this is a complicated question but I
read Rick strassman's book uh The Spirit
Molecule after meeting you I believe and
I know Dr Strassman who's a pretty um
let's say mainstream psychiatrist was
quite shocked to put it mildly by what
his
research subjects were reporting as a
consequence of of being administered DMT
they would report being shot out of
their body and then going to other
places and encountering what were
essentially alien beings of one form or
another and when Strassman would suggest
to such people that this was like a
dream or maybe they were encountering
something akin to a jungian archetype
they would say no you don't understand
this was more real than being there than
being in reality itself
and so so this is the thing that doesn't
fit for me is that and and I know that
in the shamanic rituals that are
associated with Ayahuasca people often
report
encounters with entities and I don't
understand how that if that's true and I
believe it to be true phenomenologically
I don't understand how that fits in with
the idea that what the psychedelics are
doing are loosening the constraints on
our most fundamental presuppositions and
so sorry for the tremendously long uh
build up to that question but it's a
complicated question and I'm wondering
what you think about well first of all
the theory that psychedelics do loosen
up our conceptions at the most
fundamental level but then how you
square that with the reports that people
make continually of meeting entities of
one form or another well they're well
they're under the influence of these
chemicals
right well uh
how long have we got here I mean it's
going to take a while to unpack this
good good but I'm looking forward to it
man as to the first uh
the first part of this the Carhartt
Harris uh notion that uh psychedelics I
think one way they put it is that they
disable temporarily this so-called
default mode Network
you know which is which is kind of the
framework that we construct
I like to call it the reality
hallucination it's the it's the
modeled if the brain creates some model
reality that we inhabit you know we're
we we don't live we don't inhabit
reality itself because
it would be too overwhelming what we
experience is a a schematic or a model
of reality that is much less information
dense than reality itself and the brain
does this in order so that we can cope
with it you know uh a lot of what the
brain does as you well know you're a
neuroscientist at least to some degree
you know that what the brain does is
filter information out there are gated
mechanisms a lot of information from the
external world through our sensory
neural interface never makes it into the
brain because it's it's not it's
I mean it's stuff that it's not
important it's just extraneous to
our construction of this model of
reality that we have to inhabit just in
order to navigate you know in order to
to function and what psychedelics do is
they temporarily disable those gated
mechanisms they just throw the gates
wide open
you know and you get flooded with all
this information
that normally is not accessible and
that can be a very useful thing from a
therapeutic angle because we can get
trapped in our default mode Network in
our reality uh hallucination if you will
our reality model uh it can be
dysfunctional it can be not helpful you
know and and then you get things like
addiction and PTSD and and so on and I
think I think something I think the the
the the core
of the therapeutic use of the
therapeutic promise if you will of
psychedelics is they let you step out of
this reference frame temporarily look at
it as though
you know as though you're separated it
and it helps give you insights as to
you know your your existential situation
so it enables you to look at trauma or
addiction or depression or things like
that from a different angle from
different perspective that normally we
can't because we're trapped inside this
this default mode Network framework and
I think I think that's helpful and I
think that that
lets you re-engineer it in a certain way
and and and this is actually reflected
on the neurological level because we
know that psilocybin things like this
can actually uh you know lead to changes
in neural architecture and connectivity
and all of these things neuroplasticity
is the is the
is the sort of overarching term for this
and
it's really
so you disrupt you blow up the default
mode Network
but it the brain is resilient the brain
is always going to tend toward
equilibrium right so it's going to fall
back together but it's going to fall
back together in a more functional way I
think it's very similar in fact maybe I
think it's quite similar to what happens
when you reboot your computer you get
this big reset essentially and it comes
back together but it works more
efficiently because it's you purged all
the cludge out of it that builds up in
in this system and in that sense it's
very much like sort of purging your
computer when you reset it you get rid
of all that stuff and it works more
efficiently so that's
important I think for the therapeutic
that's that's really the therapeutic
promise almost everything that
psychedelics
that that people are excited about
psychedelics from a therapeutic
standpoint I think has to do with this
uh ability to uh you know first of all
disable and then reconstruct the default
mode Network in a way that's more
functional and and you know
more more well simply in a way that's
more functional less less dysfunctional
so I think that's what's going on now
when you
blow it up especially with something
like DMT
which is where you get more than other
places but Ayahuasca these other things
as well you sometimes
have a feeling or you get a definite
sense that
ear in a place where as people say it
seems more real than real
and there are entities there or what's
perceived to be entities
and you're in communication with them
and they are
very interested in communicating and
transmitting information
uh
I mean so a number of questions come up
about this right people have these
experience experiences not always
not always on all psychedelics not every
time
but under some circumstances people have
these experiences I just came from this
conference in in the UK a couple of
weeks ago so I well primed for this
because this this was the this was the
the topic of the conference it was
called the sentient other and everyone
was uh presenting their ideas about the
entities
I am
I mean my my first
you know I I mean I don't think you can
take psychedelics and not be open-minded
I think that one thing that psychedelics
don't do
teach us is how little we know it's a
it's a useful reminder of how little we
know
about the universe about reality about
the way things are you know and and in
that sense it can be it can be very
useful because science especially in
scientists particularly tend to be
arrogant
you know there's there's a tendency for
science to say
we pretty much have this thing figured
out you know and and psychedelics are a
reminder that no actually
we have only a very tiny slice of it
figured out and even that is subject to
question because that's the nature of
science right you never prove a theory
all you can do is not disprove it you
know so we we understand in great detail
a very small piece of reality
but there's an infinitude of reality
beyond that that we know basically
nothing so we need science
Science And scientists
should be humble they should always keep
that in mind how little we know that
said though so with that Preamble I do
have to say uh
you know
reductionism or skepticism
or what they come sometimes call okum's
razor approach the principle of
parsimony
is a useful tool in science
it is a statement that
the
what explains the data the simplest
model that explains the data
let's start there you know and then it's
it's shortcomings its limitations its
deficiencies
will come to light as we as we begin to
investigate phenomena and eventually
we're gonna but but science starts with
hypotheses about the way
things are what my granddad used to call
how the board ate the Cabbage you know
uh it it begins with theories about the
way a certain aspect of reality is you
create a hypothesis you test it against
the observed data and if something comes
up that the data
you know can that that your model can't
explain
then you say okay the the the model is
deficient we either have to modify the
model maybe we have to blow up the model
maybe it's completely invalid usually
that's not the way it works I mean you
tweak it you change you know a thing
here a thing there and you make it fit
better with what you know what we
presume that we know right when it comes
to entities
foreign
here's the here's the thing I know that
people say
oh no this is real this is more real
than reality itself
but you know people are not
epistemologists people are not qualified
to say what is more real than reality
itself you know I mean people may think
it's more real it may seem more real
than reality itself you know we've all
had vivid dreams right and we wake up
and we think oh my God you know that was
so real but you know it was a dream
right because you woke up and it's not
there
and so I think that the judgments made
by people who encounter these entities
uh
you know the the fact that they have
this impression that these things are
real and more real than real itself does
not necessarily make it so
okay so so let me okay so let me let me
ask you this so
um obviously when we dream as you
pointed out we can encounter entities of
our imagination those are other dream
characters all right I had a client once
who who was a lucid dreamer and a very
good one right and she could actually
ask her dream characters what they
represented symbolically and they would
tell her right and so okay so let me let
me modify the question that I posed to
you before and tell me what you think of
this so
we know that the psychedelics produce an
increment in trait openness and we know
with the site with the psilocybin in
particular that if people have a
mystical experience with psilocybin once
or a couple of times that their level of
trait openness which is the creativity
Dimension increases by wonders one
standard deviation and that appears more
or less permanent so we could say that
that one of the things the psychedelics
do by
loosening the strictures on the morph on
the more fundamental Realms of
conception is place people into a state
that's analogous to the state of
creativity
and so if you're creative you can shift
conceptions and the the downside of that
is you shift them when it's not
necessary and the upside is now and then
you shift them in a Direction that's
extremely productive and so that
shifting becomes more possible
under the influence of psychedelics and
then we could say that while it's
possible that one of the uh sources of
creativity
might be the capacity of the human
imagination to generate
fictional personalities we do that in
dreams obviously your brain is we would
say your brain is producing these
fictional characters that have many of
the attributes of real characters when
you dream you can see them you can hear
them you can interact with them you
don't have immediate access to their
contents contents of Consciousness they
seem like autonomous beings and so we
could say maybe what happens when you're
experimenting with psychedelics is that
you enter a Dream escape that's
populated by creatures of the
imagination that have a certain degree
of autonomy and the influx of
information that's also characteristic
of the Psychedelic experience produces
that sense of hyper reality that's then
attributed to the characters themselves
does that seem plausible I know it's
just a hypothesis obviously but well but
it is
it does I mean obviously all we're doing
is uh tried to construct hypotheses you
know that fit the data that fit what we
know so far always with the caveat that
we don't know much and the picture is
incomplete and so on but here's the
thing I
I I think I mean the the question
perpetually that comes up with these
entities is you encounter these entities
in the Psychedelic State and then the
question is are they real
but I think you have to step back from
that and first of all you have to say
well what do you mean by real you know
well yeah that's a problem man yeah yeah
that's a big problem I mean my sort of
default position is anything that you
experience is real it's real because it
can be experienced but is it originate
within is it come from the collective
unconscious does it come from out there
in some other dimension and do these
terms even make sense I mean you just
get into it an epistemological mess
because how can you even posit there
there is an outside I mean one one thing
that psychedelics do is they teach you
it's all one you know there's no
separation between the self and and the
cosmos at large and all that so so it's
like it's a
a non-starter it's a zero-sum game to
you know to maybe it's maybe it's maybe
it's more useful to say uh rather than
to say are they real
you know because they're real enough
that they're experienced so in that
sense they're real whether they're
inside or outside originate from the
self or some other dimension maybe the
question we should ask is is the
information that they transmit useful
can we learn from it can they teach us
something that we could not otherwise
know
you know and and that seems to me
potentially a more useful question you
know and my my brother was all about
this like he would he would take uh high
doses of mushrooms you know by himself
and uh in total darkness that was his
formula you know heroic Doses and total
darkness and he would have these
dialogues these conversations with these
entities
and it was all about
how do I know you're real how or more
like can you tell me something
that I cannot possibly know and if you
do that I'll know you're real
and they would say well we don't care if
you think you're we're real or not you
know but but
and then again how do you define some
how do you
[Music]
Define something that you can't possibly
know you know and if they say I mean you
could say give me you know the square
root of a large number and if it comes
back and it turns out it's correct as
trivial as that is that would
demonstrate that it that it was real
information they're they're giving to
you but it still doesn't really
no you know no and they're in
mathematical Geniuses who can do that
yeah uh yeah yeah well okay so let me
push let me push on that a little bit I
everything that you said so far seems to
me to be Rock Solid
um so with regards to these entities
again so
um I I was reminded of two things I mean
Carl Jung spent years talking to uh
entities of his imagination documenting
that books like the red book he made
that a Visionary practice and
had Illuminating conversations with
specters of his own imagination but of
course he also believed that there was a
collective element to those and so you
might say that
well to to the degree for example that
we're each inhabited by dark impulses we
might say well we're each pray to the
same demonic forces that's one way of
thinking about it and they're the same
and they're transpersonal and they exist
to some degree cross-culturally and they
spend time and so these creatures of
imagination can have histories and can
inhabit Us in some real sense and they
can do that collectively and then
so so that complicates things
tremendously but then I would also ask
in your investigations your long-term
investigations of multiple
Ayahuasca experiences across different
people
are there any commonalities of entities
that strike you as particularly
significant I know people talk about
clown figures for example mechanical
clowns in the DMT State and health
machines and this sort of Elvis yeah
yeah exactly the health machines and of
course that's that's complicated too
because once one person starts talking
about it that might increase the
probability that other people would
experience it but have you seen
commonalities of entity experience that
would suggest something the existence of
something that is is at least
transpersonal even though it might also
still be subjective whatever that means
in such a context yes yes I I I have and
I think this exists in these in these uh
shamanic Traditions uh and the
ayahuascias are particularly good uh
good example of of that you know uh uh
and and
again I I have not seen
anything that convinces me I mean I'm
basically a jungian you know so I
believe in the collective unconscious is
this
it's a good model this this
transpersonal realm of shared archetypes
and all that and then there's the
individual unconscious I haven't seen
anything in the reports of the
Psychonauts that would that would not
fit into that model that says oh well
this doesn't really fit this is outside
that model and it and it and so that
model's not valid I haven't seen that I
I think that it is I think basically
these entities they are experienced as
real but they come from the collective
unconscious and if you if you look at uh
the Ayahuasca traditions and there is a
uh an interesting book here that that's
very illustrative of this which many
people know about it's uh it's the book
that uh you're familiar with the artist
Pablo amaringo the the Visionary
Peruvian artist he and Luis Eduardo Luna
wrote a uh a book
he painted his Visions right he
remembered all his Visions in perfect
detail painted these visions
and
Eduardo and he collaborated on a book
called Ayahuasca Visions the religious
iconography of a Peruvian shaman uh it's
still in print the book is remarkable
because it's its typical coffee table
style format with full color
illustrations of of the Visions on one
page and then wordo's descriptions in
English on the facing page dissecting
all the elements of the entities and
everything else that you see in these
Visions as narrated by Pablo I mean
public you know Eduardo Luna was was
basically just the transcriber but uh uh
Pablo described in great detail
dissected each one of these paintings
and the and they're about I guess 20 or
so of these of these paintings in this
book and it's basically a course in
vegetalismo it's talking about
digitalismo this this practice which is
really a amalgam of many indigenous
traditions and and kind of mushed
together into a mestizo tradition but he
describes uh
these entities you know they all have
names they have a particular appearance
and you know the plants the animals even
you know there are UFOs there are all
kinds of things in this in these Visions
Pablo describes every one of them and
any
ayahuascaro
in in training work you know in my
apprentices under under Pablo or any of
these traditional uh ayahuas Heroes
they're gonna see these things you know
I mean this is a cultural context
they're going to see these things and
what they see is going to be similar you
know so it's sort of like it's sort of
like uh terence's uh you know
self-transforming elf machines I mean
Terence says that
you know he has a huge voice in the meme
sphere pretty soon everybody's seen
self-transforming elf machines you know
people that's what people see well you
can imagine you know the the
the the brain is obviously a an organ
that can produce personalities because
it produces our personalities and it's
it seems to me that it's highly probable
that the way that we we organize
information
is in the form of personality so I mean
and I certainly got a fair bit of this
from thinking about Jung's work I mean
if you're inhabited by a rage state
which I think is a good way of thinking
about it you might think well what form
does the anger take and the answer is
well it has a personality you might act
like enraged people that you've seen in
movies you might act like enraged people
that you've seen in your life the rage
has a goal which is the crushing of the
opponent let's say and it has
perceptions and it has action patterns
it's a personality and you could
conceptualize the rage Spirit as Aries
the God of War and that would be a
perfectly reasonable way of looking at
it and it could be that all of our micro
perceptions and all of our macro
perceptions for that matter have the
intrinsic form of personality and that
that's partly what we encounter when we
dream and so I was thinking too you know
that as
as the gods if the gods are Aggregates
of micro personalities that might be one
way of thinking about it they're micro
personalities that are aggregated within
societies across time and then
and then can be apprehended collectively
to some degree As you move towards a
monotheistic vision of the world what
you're moving toward is the ultimate
aggregation of all these socially
modified micro personalities into one
conceptual scheme and that would
parallel that hierarchy that of
cognition and conception that well we
already discussed that people like
friston are working on and so it isn't
that surprising I suppose if you think
about it that way if the brain is a
personality producing machine so to
speak that there are certain states that
you can encounter under the influence of
chemical alteration where you encounter
those personalities even those that have
some degree of autonomy I mean rage has
some degree of autonomy and so does lust
and so does thirst and so does hunger
they're not
they're not exactly you they're
forces or personalities which is a more
accurate way of thinking about that you
can fall prey to
and so why can't why can't that occur in
a more complex manner well I I think it
can I mean I mean this this totally fits
within the yogi in a bottle you know
that that within the collective
unconscious there are these
these uh I forget the exact term that he
used but these these complexes almost
like uh uh autonomous personalities you
know and and and and and multiple
personality disorder is a recognized
thing
and I guess in some ways all of us have
it in a certain sense in that we have
you know we do have these multiple
personalities but they like rage lust
and and and so on but they they don't
take over the controls
you know most of the time they're
suppressed to a certain degree but
they're always there their influencing
whoever it is in the in the cabin in at
the bridge that's running the thing and
in pathology they can't take over you
know and then you've got a problem well
they do with Tourette's Syndrome they do
with Tourette's they do with obsessive
compulsive disorder and you know you
know and you you can think about the
relationship between these motivational
States like Rage or anxiety let's say
that that are transpersonal in that
everyone experiences them we know that
with the Psychedelic experience that set
is very important and that if someone is
in a negative emotional state or
situation that elicits fear and let's
say rage and then they Embark Upon A
psychedelic experience that that
particular State can be magnified beyond
belief and so that's a good way to have
a hellish experience and so
you know we we do have to remember and I
know of course you do that the
Psychedelic experiences that we're
talking about are ritualized so that a
an absolutely Dreadful outcome is less
probable but you might say if it was
just done randomly it could easily be
the Magnifique magnification of a state
of Terror or a state of Rage as the
magnification as a state of
Enlightenment or Bliss right so this is
the importance of the ritual of the
ritual context this is
exactly that what these Traditions have
grown around is the idea
that there needs to be a an appropriate
set and setting there needs to be an
appropriate scent the most important
variable certainly and uh uh you know I
sometimes say in my talks I say
Ayahuasca is a liquid
Ayahuasca will fill any vessel you
create for it you know and hopefully the
vessel is appropriate to uh you know to
foster a positive experience and
insights and all that but we know that
it's not always that way you know we
know that you know again like with any
uh spiritual tradition where you're
finding where you're dealing with
powerful spiritual uh
forces uh
they're always bad apples you know
they're a bad shop and they're they're
they're bad Shaman who's who's don't
have your best interests at heart you
know and there's a term for it in in
Ayahuasca it's called ruharia I mean
basically witches or or Sorcerers they
they have this understanding these
people
are power freaks you know they want
control over other people and they'll
often you know use Ayahuasca that way
they'll often you know Spike their
Ayahuasca with uh datura with Brook
manzia which is a drug that you know
basically
renders people
both delirious and confused but also
very suggestible you know and it's it's
used as a date rape drug and things like
that some you know bad bad shamans will
put that stuff into Ayahuasca uh so you
want to you want to be careful there is
no uh
you know there there's no Good
Housekeeping seal for Iowa's girls you
want to be careful who you get mixed up
with right well the same thing applies
when you're looking for a
psychotherapist I mean and and in in
terms of the importance of set in
relationship to positive transformation
I mean Carl Rogers tried to lay out some
of the preconditions for successful
psychotherapy and so I'll just run
through those because they're very much
akin to the manner in which the stage
needs to be set for a positive
psychedelic experience so Rogers
essentially I'm paraphrasing but but
it's okay is so first of all the person
who's coming to psychotherapy has to
want to change it has to be voluntary
and that's actually something that's
been hammered home by now generations of
psychotherapeutic practitioners
regardless of their theoretical school
that voluntary exposure to information
that might have a transformative quality
so that can be threatening voluntary
exposure is Redemptive it has to be
voluntary so you have to want to change
and then if you come to psychotherapy
for it to work it has to be embarked on
in a spirit of mutual Trust
and so there's some courage there
um on on both the part of the
practitioner and the client and then you
also have to swear or vow in some sense
to engage in truthful exploration and
dialogue and so it has to you have to
admit you have a problem so there's a
certain humility there you have to be
willing to learn and change
you have to engage in truthful
exploration and dialogue and you have to
be aiming for improvement
and if all of those things are there
then well in principle the
psychotherapeutic process can begin and
you might say well if all those things
are there then learning itself can begin
and it might be that the set that is
being established at the beginning of a
psychedelic experience is just precisely
akin to establishing the preconditions
for Learning and personality expansion
itself because you know in this
conversation you and I will look we're
we're sitting here we're kind of relaxed
we trust each other for a variety of
different reasons we've met before but I
I know of your reputation scientifically
and I trust your work and and and so we
can embark on a creative
creative dialogue that's hypothetically
mutually Redemptive because we're both
going to learn something and we can
bring everyone else along for the ride
and I don't really see that as any
different in some fundamental sense than
establishing the proper set for a
psychedelic experience or the proper
preconditions for any relationship
including a therapeutic relationship
right I I think you're exactly right I
think those preconditions are an almost
exact match for the ideal set and
setting you know I mean there's a great
deal of uh emphasis on the set the
setting
the sept and I I don't limit the set to
just uh
you know in my mind it's it's everything
you bring to the table it's not just
your mood at the moment or you know it's
it's everything you bring to the table
it's you you're the sin you're always
the same but you're bringing it to this
very special situation and then the
other variables that are
sort of in the background not often
mentioned but very important are the
dose and the medicine you know because
you're that's part of this four-part
Dynamic of variables that's going to
interact and the most important thing
about a a therapeutic uh psychedelic
session really like you say it applies
to any therapeutic session it's number
one
you know a safe setting a safe a setting
where you feel uh
you trust the other person you feel that
the situation is safe not threatening
and you're willing to learn you're
willing to surrender you do everything
you can to
to make sure everything's kosher and
then at the critical moment you just
have to let go because that's an
important thing you have to say okay
let go you know I mean it's kind of like
jumping off a cliff or out of a plane
you trust that the parachute is going to
open at some point you know and and you
just have to accept that yeah well we do
that while we're talking you and I I
mean because at the beginning of this
podcast neither of us knew what
direction the conversation was going to
take but
we what we're doing in some sense is
loosening up our cognitive structures
you and I both have some perspectives on
what the Psychedelic experience might
consist of and what psychological
transformation means but we're willing
to play with that to some degree and so
we're willing to open ourselves up to
the transformative process that obtains
during the course of what should what we
try to make into a genuine dialogue and
so
and I again I do see that as exactly the
essentially exactly the same thing and I
think you can think about it in terms of
classical virtue in some sense so what
you want to do is bring a an attitude of
humility and courageous trust to the
situation and the humility would be well
you know good as I am I probably still
have a few things to learn and the
courageous trust is well if we undertake
the process correctly then the
information that will be generated will
actually be of benefit to everyone
involved but that's a statement of faith
in some sense right because you don't
know that to begin with but then it's
faith in the dialogue essentially and I
don't see that it it I don't see that as
being particularly different in the in
the Psychedelic situation no I don't
either it's exaggerated and intensified
exactly exactly
what have you made of the research
that's been conducted in the in the labs
at uh by Roland Griffith and his crew
well
well I mean uh obviously it's
groundbreaking you know and uh Roland of
his colleagues are uh you know they have
set the bar very high and they're the
Pioneers for sure and uh uh you know
everyone else is kind of following along
from that I think that they have uh
you know particularly of their work with
end of life anxiety and this sort of
thing I mean I think that's setting new
paradigms for medicine uh
uh
and and it's addressing a really
important deficit in in medicine right
because
medicine
the way it's practiced biomedicine I
sort of distinct make a distinction
there from say alternative complementary
medicine but biomedicine is about
preventing people from dying right and
they will go to Great Lakes
to uh keep people alive maybe to like
certain like cancer therapy and this
sort of thing maybe going too far to
keep people alive it's like survival at
all costs medicine needs to face the
fact that everybody dies you know sooner
or later
the therapy is gonna fail no matter what
it is but to view it as a failure is an
incorrect perception at a certain point
you have to reach a point where you say
this patient this person is not going to
live
rather than focus on keeping them alive
at all costs
let's think about giving them a peaceful
death you know facilitating A Beautiful
Death
that concept that death can be beautiful
is something that is missing from
medicine
as its practice and I I think Iowa I I
think that psychedelics
offer an opportunity to reintroduce that
concept
you know right so just to review for
people who who are listening so Roland
Griffiths who conducts psilocybin
research at Johns Hopkins and is a very
solid scientists to say the least
has Purdue studies showing that with
patients who have a terminal prognosis
of cancer that a mystical experience
induced by psilocybin can produce a
profound reduction in mortality related
anxiety and that's a very
sterile way of describing what's
actually a remarkable event because it
sounds in some sense like it's reduced
to
simple Occam's razor chemistry you give
people a dose of psilocybin and they're
less anxious it's like that isn't what's
happening what's happening and we don't
know the details of what's happening
what's happening is that imagine that
one of the canonical fears that people
bring to life existentially is fear of
suffering and mortality
mean that in public uh humiliation and
excommunication are probably the two big
classes of fear so we'll say fear of
mortal suffering
and then a mystical experience
undertaken under the appropriate
circumstances can reduce the fear of
mortal suffering itself under the most
dire circumstances in the dire
circumstances would be wind directly
confronted with the inevitability of
mortality and suffering and so but I
haven't been able to
uh gather much information on exactly
how the transformation that's induced by
the Psychedelic substance actually makes
it makes itself manifest because that
has to be a very fundamental cognitive
and perceptual retooling
to be much more sanguine in the face of
death itself
very big things are shifting underneath
the surface and so do you have any sense
with with your vast experience in such
domains do you have any experience or
any sense of what it is that shifts yeah
I I do I uh
uh my I I think again it goes back to
this what we were talking about before
about stepping outside your cognitive
reference frame stepping outside your
default mode mode framework whatever
that might be giving you a chance to
look at death
as you might look at any
any problem that you have anxiety or
trauma or whatever look at it from a
different perspective and what has
impressed me about the reports of people
uh who have had this end-of-life therapy
with psilocybin
what what seems to be the therapeutic uh
uh what is most beneficial for them is
they come away from the experience and
they're not
preoccupied with death anymore you know
they're not looking ahead to this moment
of dying you know they know it's out
there but their attitude is well wait a
minute
I'm alive now you know I'm alone I see
let's focus on that death is there it
will come but I think that's
tremendously
uh helpful for them and anxiety
relieving to say let's just focus day to
day on the moment
you know being alive in the moment and
that relieves their anxiety greatly and
it's interesting you know that uh you
know we don't evaluate like like many
Cancer drugs chemotherapy and that sort
of thing they're evaluated their
effectiveness is based on how much how
long did they prologue life you know did
they live longer that would be expected
if they didn't take this chemotherapy
often many of these things do extend
life but by the time you finally die
you're just you're a wreck you know it
destroys the body you know and it's
interesting that it nobody is claiming
that psilocybin cures cancer
but it certainly can extend life
you know beyond expectation I mean
there's a woman up here that there's a
movie out called Dost two and uh she I
I've been in this movie part of it
called dose two and she started out with
uh terminal uh diagnosis of uh I think
it was uh colon cancer liver cancer or
something she was told she wouldn't have
she would live about six months
that was five years ago
you know she's had two psilocybin
sessions
you would never think of this person as
being sick they don't appear to be sick
her attitude is good and you know she
knows she's dying
but she doesn't
live every moment anticipating that
she's more about
she's living in the moment and it really
it's beautiful to see you know because
her her family life her relationship
with her husband her friends and all
that
that's what she's enjoying and she's
having a a good time everybody knows
she's gonna die sooner or later
they've stopped predicting but that then
again as you said that's also that's
true of all of us to somebody of course
yeah and the end can come at any moment
and to be preoccupied with that
obviously can produce very
counterproductive consequences well so I
just did a uh a lecture series on The
Sermon on the Mount for this Peterson
Academy that we're putting together
online educational initiative and I I
want to just run that by you for a
second in relationship to what we just
described so as far as I can tell
the ethos in The Sermon on the Mount is
quite straightforward it's not party
like there's there's no tomorrow because
uh the Lilies of the Field do not toil
and and do not spin it's it's not a
hippie ethos at all it's certainly not
tuned in turn on and drop out it's it's
two parts the first part is
it's to love God with all your heart and
soul and that means to me technically
speaking psychologically speaking let's
say to do something like Orient yourself
as much as you possibly can to the
highest good that you're capable of
conceptualizing
and so for example when you're
ensconced in a family and facing a
mortal challenge one of the higher Goods
that you might attend to is
to make the most out of every moment
that you have with the people that you
love
and so and then once you're oriented in
that direction then to pay as much
attention to the moment as possible
Right to let the day be sufficient let
the Troubles of the day be sufficient
to to the day to stay say that
sufficient unto the day are the troubles
therein it's an injunction to focus on
the moment
and then you might say well
there's a tremendous amount of
information in the moment a tremendous
amount of Redemptive information and the
more you pay attention to the moment the
more you open yourself up to what's in
some sense the infinite complexity of
the moment
and so you might say if you Orient
yourself properly and that would be a
matter of getting the set right at all
times not just when you're preparing for
a psychedelic experience if you get the
set right and you open yourself up to
the moment then you can find all the
meaning that you need to immerse
yourself in life in that moment and
that's dependent on the intensity of
your attention yeah well that's okay so
that's very that's very useful that that
conceptualization so your sense is that
it turns people's the insights the
mystical insights turn people away from
the precipice of death to the infinite
possibility of the moment exactly that
fear of death might be one of those
screens in some sense that are blocking
or inhibiting the flow of Redemptive
information
and so the Psychedelic experience
obliterates that and says remember
what's right in front of you
yeah and the fear of death is
you know this is what the Psychedelic
experience helps defuse you know by by
refocusing on the moment I am hopeful I
don't know if it will ever happen but I
I think the next step in in psilocybin
sort of psychedelic therapy for the end
of life uh and interesting uh
threshold could be crossed if you will
if people would if uh
you could arrange the this therapy so
that the family members
could also participate with the dying
person you know can you imagine the
dynamic that that would let that that
would engender
you know people to share this experience
of you know the loved ones impending
immortality impending mortality for sure
but just the richness of the
relationships the ability that
psychedelics give you some time to
honestly
relate to your loved ones you know in a
way that is unfiltered
and you know how hard it is sometimes
for us to really Express to someone
our love you know even though we we love
them but sometimes the words I love you
is a hard thing to say
you know and I I think it would be very
helpful for the family to be able to uh
not only be present but also be in the
altered state with with the people you
know and uh because it would be as
healing for them as it is for the person
who is dying yeah well I've noticed that
I've noticed that families
who cope well with the impending death
of someone that's Central to the family
often do that in no small part by paying
increased attention to the
remaining relationships
and so that as they lose one they deepen
the others and sometimes in some sense
as a consequence of that loss
right and so that might be an analog to
to what you're describing I guess the
trick with a family would be to try to
get the set of the entire family
match to the circumstance because it is
also the case that the stress that
impending mortality can can place
a family within can also bring out the
pathologies and divide people further
and so
but obviously that's a sub-optimal
situation it's worth exploring It's
Tricky territory and again I think I
think if we look to the indigenous model
you know as probably something we should
look at as a way to approach this
because they often do exactly this kind
of thing you know and but they're
you know very much more about the
collective and all that so so you know
it's just an idea I mean it'd be
interesting if it could happen you know
yeah well I don't think any experiments
have been done yet on
like family
experience of collective family
experience of psychedelic transformation
for example
um we haven't got that far in the
scientific analysis of such things hard
to get hard to get FDA approval for that
but it's worth it's worth attempting to
do that because I think that that would
again be a
a significant step toward creating this
new this new paradigm around death you
know that uh medicine
you know that's a big deficit of
medicine you know this idea that uh
death can be death is inevitable but
death doesn't have to be terrible
you know and then and
so that's that's the frontier hopefully
that could be explored so let me ask you
about your plans for the future so what
what looms on the horizon for you and
your work at the moment
well right at the moment my work is uh
you know I mean I'm not really doing
research in psychedelics anymore uh and
never really worked in the therapeutic
area I was always kind of a nuts and
bolts guy looking at the plants the
molecules the pharmacology and so on uh
right now what's occupying my time is
this project in ketos uh with the
herbarium that's going to be that's
gonna be a two to five year project
uh I need I need to raise somewhere
between five and ten million dollars I I
should mention that the McKenna Academy
is a 501c3 we're happy to accept your
money and uh and that's what we're gonna
that's where we're gonna put our
resources as well as
doing additional conferences in the you
know and Retreats you know to some
degree but our main focus is going to be
this this big project and then we'll
probably do another espd conference in a
in a few years but it takes a lot of
effort to pull that off so it would be
fun to come to that I wish you could
come next time for sure yeah you've been
in immersed in the Psychedelic world for
a very long time
um what what has been the consequences
for you personally in terms of the way
that you look at the world and maybe we
could say the part what's positive about
what you've experienced and are there
things you regret or cautions that you
would put forward as well
well uh
uh no there's I mean you make choices in
life you know uh always you make choices
and every choice you make closes off
other choices sometimes I look at my
career and I'm I wonder you know I could
have been a better academic I could have
had a more Stellar career in Academia
and so on
but you know what drove my what drove me
was curiosity we get back to that
original idea what I was interested in
psychedelics emerged early in my life as
the most interesting
not just the Most Interesting Drug but
the most interesting thing on my radar
and I sort of grabbed on to that and I
really have followed that ever since
what what was true 50 or 60 years ago is
still true
you know psychedelics are the most
interesting thing on my radar so uh but
you know my era my my phase of doing
active research on psychedelics and so
on is probably over
and so now I just talk about it and and
uh as a researcher I I am looking at
looking at what I can do to uh preserve
indigenous knowledge Preserve
biodiversity slow down
the devastation of the Amazon a very
small part really of the total thing but
you know it's what I'm trying to do I
don't have any real regrets I I have in
fact psychedelics have been a unallied
blessing for me in the sense that uh
I've learned a lot I feel like from
psychedelics and the people I've
encountered and you know the experiences
I've had along the way
uh have all been Rich you know and uh
and really I cherish them I mean I'm
getting to the point now I'll be 72 in
December
hopefully I have some time left uh I
mean I'm not ready to check out
but
you never know as you get older you get
different health problems crop up and so
on so you never really know how long but
uh whatever
happens I'm happy with the journey so
far and
it's it's been it's been marvelous and
I've been able to meet so many
interesting people and go interesting
places and meet people like you for
example and just have these great
conversations so no regrets
well that's a that's a lovely place to
stop and we've come to the end of our
discussion as well and so I would like
to thank you Dr McKenna for agreeing to
talk to me today and for sharing your
insights into this remarkable domain of
ethnobotanical research and and research
on the psychopharmacological frontier
and uh I wish you luck with your
documentation project and with your
upcoming conventions I think that would
be something quite remarkable to attend
and so maybe you can keep me in the loop
with regards to the timing of the next
conference for all of those who are
watching and listening I'm going to
spend an extra half an hour as I always
do with my guests talking to Dr Dennis
McKenna we'll talk about the particulars
of his career which I think will make
for a very interesting discussion hello
everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com